Credit Risk Modeling

Phase 1: Data Acquisition & Cleaning (The "Data Analyst" Work)
Real financial data is messy. This phase will be 60% of your work.
Dataset: Use the LendingClub Loan Dataset (available on Kaggle) or the German Credit Data (UCI Machine Learning Repository). LendingClub is larger and more modern.
Pandas Tasks:
Handle missing values (e.g., fill missing "employment length" with 0 or the median).
Encode categorical variables: Turn text like "Mortgage," "Rent," and "Own" into numbers (0, 1, 2) or One-Hot vectors.
Feature Engineering: Create new metrics relevant to finance, such as a Debt-to-Income (DTI) Ratio if it’s not explicitly provided.
Phase 2: Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
Before modeling, you must understand the "shape" of risk.​
Questions to Answer:
Do higher interest rates actually correlate with higher default rates?
What is the income distribution of defaulters vs. non-defaulters?
Tools: Use Pandas for aggregation (groupby) and Matplotlib/Seaborn for visualization (histograms, correlation heatmaps).
Phase 3: The "Quant" Modeling (The "Risk Analyst" Work)
Here you use Scikit-learn to build the brain of your project.​
Split Data: Separate into Training (80%) and Testing (20%) sets to ensure your model works on new data.
Baseline Model: Start with Logistic Regression. It’s the industry standard for credit scorecards because it’s interpretable (you can explain why someone was rejected).
Advanced Model: Try a Random Forest Classifier or Gradient Boosting to see if you can beat the baseline accuracy.
Evaluation: Do not use simple accuracy. In finance, false negatives (approving a bad borrower) are expensive. Use ROC-AUC (Receiver Operating Characteristic) and the Confusion Matrix to measure performance.
Phase 4: The "ValtricAI" Twist (Productization)
To make this "research-grade" rather than just a tutorial, treat the final model as an API.
Write a Python script that accepts a "New Borrower Profile" (e.g., Income: $80k, Loan: $20k, Home: Rent) and returns a Risk Score (0-100) and a Decision (Approve/Reject).
Code Snippet Layout
Here is how your imports will map to the tasks:
python
import pandas as pd # Data cleaning, loading CSVs, pivot tables
import numpy as np # Array math, log transformations of income
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split # Splitting data
from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression # The Baseline Model
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier # The Advanced Model
from sklearn.metrics import roc_auc_score, confusion_matrix # Measuring financial success
